sisl 0.16.0 Release Notes
*************************

Released on 2025-04-10.


New features
============

- Enable `...` in MD-slices of siesta output siles

  Allowed `read_scf(imd=...)` to ease the understanding
  of *everything*. Partly resolves #835.

  (:pull:`835`)


- Added Nambu spin configuration

  Allowed `sisl` to operate with the Nambu spin-configuration.
  This spin-configuration is made for spin-orbit +
  super-conductivity.

  Nearly all functionality that is available for SOC is also
  availiable for BdG (Nambu) spin configuration.

  This goes in line with the recent additions to the Siesta
  code with superconductivity.

  (:pull:`896`)


- Added atom borders in `sisl.viz` plots

  The possibility to add and modify borders of plotted
  atoms has been added. In geometry plots, ``atoms_style``
  now accepts the keys ``border_color`` and ``border_width``.
  By default now atoms are plotted with a black border.

  (:pull:`897`)


- Enabled implicit conversion of unknown objects

  Now users can automatically convert unknown objects
  and use them directly in `sisl` methods that are
  implemented for various methods.

  E.g.

  .. code::

     import ase
     import sisl

     gr = sisl.geom.graphene()
     sisl_rotated = sisl.rotate(gr, ...)

     gr = ase.Atoms(...)
     atoms_rotated = sisl.rotate(gr, ...)

     gr = ase.Atoms(...)
     sisl_rotated = sisl.rotate(gr, ..., ret_sisl=True)

  will all work, the first and last will return a `Geometry`, while
  the middle one will return an `ase.Atoms` object.

  To forcefully return the `sisl` object, use the latter form with ``ret_sisl``.

  (:pull:`898`)


- Enabled `...` for `atoms=` arguments

  Makes selecting all atoms slightly more intuitive if wanted.



Changes and improvements
========================

- Enabled `astype` for sparse matrices

  This enables changing the data-type of sparse matrices
  in a consistent manner without having to use the `transform`
  which would be impossible in the real->complex conversion.

  (:pull:`865`)


- Enabled `hsxSileSiesta.write_hamiltonian`

  Finally we can write Hamiltonians from `sisl` in the ``HSX``
  file format.

  For further details see: `https://gitlab.com/siesta-project/siesta/-/issues/183`__

  (:pull:`884`)


- Use `towncrier`

  We change the release notes to be constructed by `towncrier`.

  This will make pull requests less prone to conflicts
  due to the merge of the `CHANGELOG.md` file.
  That file is now deprecated, see `changes/README.rst` for details.

  (:pull:`893`)


- Changed ``hermitian => conjugate``

  Now one should use ``H.transpose(conjugate=True, ...)``
  instead. The Hermitian argument did not make sense, since
  the transpose was implicit of the function name.

  It is now also more obvious how ``conjugate=..., spin=...``
  works together.

  Also, all arguments to this method are forced keywords.

  A ``len(H) == H.no * 4`` for Nambu spin configuration.

  The diagonalization of the Hamiltonian will return
  an eigenvalue symmetric spectrum (about E=0).
  Hence this one will be dependent on the shift of the
  spectrum.

  (:pull:`896`)


- Enabled creating Hamiltonian matrices from other Hamiltonians

  Previously, `Hamiltonian.fromsp` would only parse `scipy.sparse.csr_matrix`
  objects. This was limiting the functionality.

  Now, all sparse matrices can be converted through any `fromsp` matrices.
  When the passed object is a SparseGeometry it will decide whether
  it is orthogonal or not. Otherwise, a user can manually specify
  the `orthogonal` argument.

  The method will automatically remove any overlap parts (if passed
  as the matrix), and will automatically extract the overlap parts
  if a matrix has been passed in ``S=``.

  (:pull:`904`)


- Added ADOS extraction of TBtrans PDOS data in `sisl.viz`

  Now plotting the ADOS from TBtrans output files can
  intrinsically be handled by `sisl.viz`.


- Added `read_brillouinzone` to multiple Siesta files

  This will allow reading `BrillouinZone` objects from
  intrinsic Siesta output files.


- All `E` arguments for tbtSile cannot be indices

  Prior versions of sisl allowed one to use indices
  instead of `E` arguments. However, this led to
  confusion when dealing with ``E=0.0``. E.g.
  ``E=0`` and ``E=0.0`` could behave differently.

  Now, everything is handled via energies.
  For looping those, its better to do:

  .. code::

     tbt = tbt...Sile(...)
     iE = tbt.Eindex(0.84)
     E = tbt.E[iE] # will get you the closest energy point to 0.84

     # or for looping:
     for E in tbt.E:
         ... do something




- Clarified gauge arguments

  Now the gauge names are `lattice` vs. `atomic` which should
  clarify a bit more with respect to the older values: `cell`
  and `atom`. The older values will still be respected.
  A `comply_gauge` method should be used for external projects
  if required.


- Enabled easier submodule access

  Allows::

      import sisl
      sisl.geom

  and basically all variants. Using this mechanism the imports
  are lazily done.

  So now `import sisl.geom` is generally not required!


- Performance improvements for k-point creation of matrices

  The internal Cython code was restructured for much better
  performance.
  This yields a significant performance improvement for DFT
  matrices (many couplings) but a very minor perf. hit
  for small TB matrices (few couplings + few rows).


- Quaternions now default to use radians for input

  This follows the general mathematical notation
  in cos/sin/tan geometrical routines.


- Removed `dtype` argument from `Spin` class

  The data-type is now contained in the parent structure.
  This removes a duplicate definition that was hard to maintain
  in the code. It should be of minor importance as most would
  define the `Spin` class without passing the `dtype` argument.


- Removed possibility of doing Hk of integer datatypes

  It increased compilation times significantly, with little gain.
  Use float32/64 or complex64/128.


- `WideBandSE.self_energy` changed its behavior of ``eta``

  Now, the first argument is the *energy*, from which only
  the imaginary value will be used.
  Also, the energy will be scaled with `np.pi` to get the
  *correct* integration.

  Additionally, when the WideBandSE object is instantiated with
  a sparsematrix, it will use the overlap matrix to account
  for this.



Bugfixes
========

- `hamiltonianSile` wrote wrong overlap and supercell connections

  Fixes and speeds up the writing of the overlap and supercell
  connections of the `hamiltonianSile`. This file type is largely
  not used, and likely shouldn't be used, but might be useful for
  educational purposes.

  Also allowed the file format to handle skewed lattices with 6
  input parameters from the cell block.

  (:pull:`887`)


- Non-collinear transposing was buggy

  The code for transposing + conjugating (adjoint operator)
  was wrong for non-collinear matrices.
  This is now finally fixed, and checked for.

  Fixed documentation in ``trs`` method for matrices.

  Fixed overlap conjugation for transpose when complex
  numbers are used.

  (:pull:`896`)


- Fix fatbands plots when there is a jump in the band structure.

  (:pull:`906`)


- Fixed `orbitals=slice(x, None)` arguments

  It now correctly uses `geometry.no` instead of `geometry.na`.

  Likely nobody used `slice` arguments anyway.


- Now ``geometry.to(ase.Atoms)`` will work

  The dispatch method expected it to be ``geometry.to[ase.Atoms]()``
  which is counter-intuitive as all the other dispatchers does
  not require this. The `__getitem__` method will still work
  as that will get you the method by witch the dispatch
  will happen.


- `projection` arguments for all functions has been streamlined

  The `projection` argument has gotten a major overhaul.
  Now the projections are generalized and streamlined across
  the code base using a common `comply_projection` method
  that decides on what it should convert to.

  All old values are still allowed, but newer ones will be preferred:

  Here are all the allowed (new) projection options:

  - `matrix` matrix product, `ij` components
  - `trace` return sum of the `ii` components
  - `diagonal` return the `ii` components
  - `hadamard` elementwise `ij` components (not equivalent to `matrix`!)
  - `hadamard:atoms` elementwise `ij` components, but summed for each atom


- fixed future deprecation for ast.Num



Contributors
============

A total of 3 people contributed to this release. People with a "+" by their
names contributed a patch for the first time.

* Nick Papior
* Pol Febrer Calabozo
* Thomas Frederiksen

Pull requests merged
====================

A total of 8 pull requests were merged for this release.

* :pull:`862`
* :pull:`870`
* :pull:`871`
* :pull:`884`
* :pull:`893`
* :pull:`896`
* :pull:`907`
* :pull:`908`

Maintenance pull requests merged
--------------------------------

* :pull:`866`
* :pull:`867`
* :pull:`872`
* :pull:`876`
* :pull:`880`
* :pull:`881`
* :pull:`895`
* :pull:`899`
* :pull:`903`
